User Manual
===========

.. index:: EPR-API, ENVISAT, MERIS, AASTR, ASAR, ESA
   single: product; dataset; record; close
   pair: epr; module

Quick start
-----------

PyEPR_ provides Python_ bindings for the ENVISAT Product Reader C API
(`EPR API`_) for reading satellite data from ENVISAT_ ESA_ (European
Space Agency) mission.

PyEPR_, as well as the `EPR API`_ for C, supports ENVISAT_ MERIS, AATSR
Level 1B and Level 2 and also ASAR data products. It provides access to
the data either on a geophysical (decoded, ready-to-use pixel samples)
or on a raw data layer. The raw data access makes it possible to read
any data field contained in a product file.

Full access to the Python EPR API is provided by the :mod:`epr` module that
have to be imported by the client program e.g. as follows::

    import epr

The following snippet open an ASAR product and dumps the "Main Processing
Parameters" record to the standard output::

    import epr

    product = epr.Product(
        'ASA_IMP_1PNUPA20060202_062233_000000152044_00435_20529_3110.N1')
    dataset = product.get_dataset('MAIN_PROCESSING_PARAMS_ADS')
    record = dataset.read_record(0)
    print(record)
    product.close()

Since version 0.9 PyEPR_ also include *update* features that are not
available in the EPR C API.
The user can open a product in update mode ('rb+') and call the
:meth:`epr.Field.set_elem` and :meth:`epr.Field.set_elems` methods of
:class:`epr.Field` class to update its elements and write changes to disk.

.. seealso:: `Update support`_ and :doc:`update_example` tutorial for details.

.. index::
   pair: open; mode


.. _PyEPR: https://github.com/avalentino/pyepr
.. _Python: https://www.python.org
.. _`EPR API`: https://github.com/bcdev/epr-api
.. _ENVISAT: https://envisat.esa.int
.. _ESA: https://earth.esa.int


.. index:: requirements, EPR-API, Python, numpy, cython, pytest, gcc, extension

Requirements
------------

In order to use PyEPR it is needed that the following software are
correctly installed and configured:

* Python3_ >= 3.5 (including PyPy3_)
* numpy_ >= 1.7.0
* `EPR API`_ >= 2.2 (optional, since PyEPR 0.7 the source tar-ball comes
  with a copy of the EPR C API sources)
* a reasonably updated C compiler [#]_ (build only)
* Cython_ >= 0.29 [#]_ (optional and build only)
* pytest_ (optional and only needed for testing)


.. [#] PyEPR_ has been developed and tested with gcc_ 4.
.. [#] The source tarball of official releases also includes the C extension
       code generated by cython_ so users don't strictly need cython_ to
       install PyEPR_.

       It is only needed to re-generate the C extension code (e.g. if one
       wants to build a development version of PyEPR_).

.. _Python3: Python_
.. _PyPy3: https://www.pypy.org
.. _numpy: https://numpy.org
.. _gcc: http://gcc.gnu.org
.. _Cython: https://cython.org
.. _pytest: https://pytest.org


.. index:: download, PyPi, GitHub, project, git
   pair: git; clone

Download
--------

.. highlight:: sh

Official source tar-balls can be downloaded form PyPi_:

    https://pypi.org/project/pyepr

The source code of the development versions is available on the GitHub_
project page

    https://github.com/avalentino/pyepr

To clone the git_ repository the following command can be used::

    $ git clone https://github.com/avalentino/pyepr.git

To get also the EPR C API source code, the following commands are necessary::

    $ cd pyepr
    $ git submodule init
    Submodule 'extern/epr-api' (https://github.com/avalentino/epr-api.git) registered for path 'extern/epr-api'
    $ git submodule update
    Cloning into '/Users/antonio valentino/projects/av/pyepr/extern/epr-api'...
    Submodule path 'extern/epr-api': checked out '93c1f1efce26c64d508fe882d5c72a898a068f29'

.. _PyPi: https://pypi.org
.. _GitHub: https://github.com
.. _git: https://git-scm.com


.. index:: install, pip
   pair: install; user
   pair: install; option
   pair: install; prefix

.. _installation:

Installation
------------

The easier way to install PyEPR_ is using tools like pip_::

    $ python3 -m pip install pyepr

For a user specific installation please use::

    $ python3 -m pip install --user pyepr

To install PyEPR_ in a non-standard path::

    $ python3 -m pip install --install-option="--prefix=<TARGET_PATH>" pyepr

just make sure that :file:`<TARGET_PATH>/lib/pythonX.Y/site-packages` is in
the :envvar:`PYTHONPATH`.

.. index::
   single: sources; setup.py
   pair: standalone; mode
   pair: EPR-API; sources
   pair: dynamic; library
   pair: git; repository

PyEPR_ can be installed from sources using the following command::

    $ python3 setup.py install

The :file:`setup.py` script by default checks for the availability of the
EPR C API source code in the :file:`<package-root>/epr-api-src` directory
and tries to build PyEPR in *standalone mode*, i.e. without linking an
external dynamic library of EPR-API.

If no EPR C API sources are found then the :file:`setup.py` script
automatically tries to link the EPR-API dynamic library.
This can happen, for example, if the user is using a copy of the PyEPR
sources cloned from a git_ repository.
In this case it is assumed that the `EPR API`_ C library is properly
installed in the system (see the Requirements_ section).

It is possible to control which `EPR API`_ C sources to use by means of the
`--epr-api-src` option of the :file:`setup.py` script::

    $ python3 setup.py install --epr-api-src=../epr-api/src

Also it is possible to switch off the *standalone mode* and force the link
with the system `EPR API`_ C library::

    $ python3 setup.py install --epr-api-src=""

.. _pip: https://pypi.org/project/pip


.. index:: test, setup.py, download, pytest
   pair: test; suite
   pair: sample; product

Testing
-------

PyEPR_ package comes with a complete test suite.
The test suite can be run from the package root directory using pytest_::

    $ python3 -m pytest tests

or running the :file:`test_all.py` script directly::

    $ python3 test_all.py

In the second case please make sure that the :mod:`epr` extension module
is in the Python search path (see also :envvar:`PYTHONPATH`).

The test script automatically downloads and decompresses the ENVISAT sample
product necessary for testing,
MER_LRC_2PTGMV20000620_104318_00000104X000_00000_00000_0001.N1__,
if it is not already available in the :file:`tests` directory.

.. note::

   please note that, unless the user already have a copy of the specified
   sample product correctly installed, an **internet connection** is
   necessary the first time that the test suite is run.

   After the first run the sample product remains in the :file:`tests`
   directory so the internet access is no longer necessary.

__ https://earth.esa.int/services/sample_products/meris/LRC/L2/MER_LRC_2PTGMV20000620_104318_00000104X000_00000_00000_0001.N1.gz


.. index:: EPR-API

Python vs C API
---------------

The Python_ EPR API is fully object oriented.
The main structures of the `C API`_ have been implemented as objects while
C function have been logically grouped and mapped onto object methods.

The entire process of defining an object oriented API for Python_ has
been quite easy and straightforward thanks to the good design of the C
API,

Of course there are also some differences that are illustrated in the
following sections.

.. _`C API`: https://rawgit.com/bcdev/epr-api/master/docs/epr_c_api/index.html


.. index:: memory, product
   pair: allocation; de-allocation

Memory management
-----------------

.. highlight:: python

Being Python_ a very high level language uses have never to worry about
memory allocation/de-allocation. They simply have to instantiate objects::

    product = epr.Product('filename.N1')

and use them freely.

Objects are automatically destroyed when there are no more references to
them and memory is de-allocated automatically.

Even better, each object holds a reference to other objects it depends
on so the user never have to worry about identifiers validity or about
the correct order structures have to be freed.

For example: the C `EPR_DatasetId` structure has a field (`product_id`)
that points to the *product* descriptor `EPR_productId` to which it
belongs to.

.. index:: dataset, record

The reference to the parent product is used, for example, when one wants
to read a record using the `epr_read_record` function:

.. code-block:: c

    EPR_SRecord* epr_read_record(EPR_SDatasetId* dataset_id, ...);

The function takes a `EPR_SDatasetId` as a parameter and assumes all
fields (including ``dataset->product_id``) are valid.
It is responsibility of the programmer to keep all structures valid and
free them at the right moment and in the correct order.

This is the standard way to go in C but not in Python_.

In Python_ all is by far simpler, and the user can get a *dateset*
object instance::

    dataset = product.get_dataset('MAIN_PROCESSING_PARAMS_ADS')

and then forget about the *product* instance it depends on.
Even if the *product* variable goes out of :index:`scope` and it is no more
directly accessible in the program the *dataset* object keeps staying valid
since it holds an internal reference to the *product* instance it depends on.

When *record* is destroyed automatically also the parent :class:`epr.Product`
object is destroyed (assumed there is no other :index:`reference` to it).

The entire machinery is completely automatic and transparent to the user.

.. note::

    of course when a *product* object is explicitly closed using the
    :meth:`epr.Product.close` any I/O operation on it and on other objects
    (bands, datasets, etc) associated to it is no more possible.

    .. index:: close


.. index:: array, numpy, raster

Arrays
------

PyEPR_ uses numpy_ in order to manage efficiently the potentially large
amount of data contained in ENVISAT_ products.

* :meth:`epr.Field.get_elems` return an 1D array containing elements of
  the field
* the `Raster.data` property is a 2D array exposes data contained in the
  :class:`epr.Raster` object in form of :class:`numpy.ndarray`

  .. note::

        :attr:`epr.Raster.data` directly exposes :class:`epr.Raster`
        i.e. shares the same memory buffer with :class:`epr.Raster`::

            >>> raster.get_pixel(i, j)
            5
            >>> raster.data[i, j]
            5
            >>> raster.data[i, j] = 3
            >>> raster.get_pixel(i, j)
            3

* :meth:`epr.Band.read_as_array` is an additional method provided by
  the Python_ EPR API (does not exist any correspondent function in the
  C API). It is mainly a facility method that allows users to get access
  to band data without creating an intermediate :class:`epr.Raster` object.
  It read a slice of data from the :class:`epr.Band` and returns it as a
  2D :class:`numpy.ndarray`.

.. index:: read_as_aaray, data


.. index:: enumeration
   pair: module; constant

Enumerators
-----------

Python_ does not have *enumerators* at language level (at least this is true
for Python_ < 3.4).
Enumerations are simply mapped as module constants that have the same
name of the C enumerate but are spelled all in capital letters.

For example:

============ ============
    C           Pythn
============ ============
e_tid_double E_TID_DOUBLE
e_smod_1OF1  E_SMOD_1OF1
e_smid_log   E_SMID_LOG
============ ============


.. index:: logging, error, exception, EPR-API

Error handling and logging
--------------------------

Currently error handling and logging functions of the EPR C API are not
exposed to python.

Internal library logging is completely silenced and errors are converted
to Python_ exceptions.
Where appropriate standard Python_ exception types are use in other cases
custom exception types (e.g. :exc:`epr.EPRError`, :exc:`epr.EPRValueError`)
are used.


.. index:: library, module, APR-API
   pair: library; initialization

Library initialization
----------------------

Differently from the C API library initialization is not needed: it is
performed internally the first time the :mod:`epr` module is imported
in Python_.


.. index:: API
   pair: high-level; API

High level API
--------------

PyEPR_ provides some utility method that has no correspondent in the C API:

* :meth:`epr.Record.fields`
* :meth:`epr.Record.get_field_names`
* :meth:`epr.Dataset.records`
* :meth:`epr.Product.get_dataset_names`
* :meth:`epr.Product.get_band_names`
* :meth:`epr.Product.datasets`
* :meth:`epr.Product.bands`

Example::

    for dataset in product.datasets():
        for record in dataset.records():
            print(record)
            print()

Another example::

    if 'proc_data' in product.band_names():
        band = product.get_band('proc_data')
        print(band)


.. index:: __str__, __repr__, print_,
   pair: special; methods

Special methods
---------------

The Python_ EPR API also implements some `special method`_ in order to make
EPR programming even handy and, in short, "pythonic_".

The ``__repr__`` methods have been overridden to provide a little more
information with respect to the standard implementation.

In some cases ``__str__`` method have been overridden to output a verbose
string representation of the objects and their contents.

If the EPR object has a ``print_`` method (like e.g. :meth:`epr.Record.print_`
and :meth:`epr.Field.print_`) then the string representation of the object
will have the same format used by the ``print_`` method.
So writing::

    fd.write(str(record))

giver the same result of::

    record.print_(fd)

Of course the :meth:`epr.Record.print_` method is more efficient for writing
to file.

.. index:: __iter__

Also :class:`epr.Dataset` and :class:`epr.Record` classes implement the
``__iter__`` `special method`_ for iterating over records and fields
respectively.
So it is possible to write code like the following::

    for record in dataset:
        for index, field in enumerate(record):
            print(index, field)

.. index:: __eq__

:class:`epr.DSD` and :class:`epr.Field` classes implement the ``__eq__``
and ``__ne__`` methods for objects comparison::

    if filed1 == field2:
        print('field 1 and field2 are equal')
        print(field1)
    else:
        print('field1:', field1)
        print('field2:', field2)

.. index:: __len__

:class:`epr.Field` object also implement the ``__len__`` special method
that returns the number of elements in the field::

    if field.get_type() != epr.E_TID_STRING:
        assert field.get_num_elems() == len(field)
    else:
        assert len(field) == len(field.get_elem())

.. note::

    differently from the :meth:`epr.Field.get_num_elems` method
    ``len(field)`` return the number of elements if the field
    type is not :data:`epr.E_TID_STRING`.
    If the field contains a string then the string length is
    returned.

.. index:: __enter__, __exit__, context, with
   pair: context; manager
   pair: with; statement

Finally the :class:`epr.Product` class acts as a `context manager`_ (i.e. it
implements the ``__enter__`` and ``__exit__`` methods).

This allows the user to write code like the following::

    with epr.open('ASA_IMS_ ... _4650.N1') as product:
        print(product)

that ensure that the product is closed as soon as the program exits the
``with`` block.


.. index:: update, ENVISAT
   pair: open; mode

Update support
--------------

It is not possible to create new ENVISAT_ products for scratch with the
EPR API. Indeed EPR means "**E**\ NVISAT **P**\ roduct **R**\ eaeder".
Anyway, since version 0.9, PyEPR_ also include basic *update* features.
This means that, while it is still not possible to create new
:class:`Products`, the user can *update* existing ones changing the
contents of any :class:`Field` in any record with the only exception of
MPH and SPH :class:`Field`\s.

The user can open a product in update mode ('rb+')::

    product = epr.open('ASA_IMS_ ... _4650.N1', 'rb+')

and update the :class:`epr.Field` element at a specific index::

    field.set_elem(new_value, index)

or also update all elements ol the :class:`epr.Field` in one shot::

    field.set_elems(new_values)

.. note::

   unfortunately there are some limitations to the update support.
   Many of the internal structures of the EPR C API are loaded when the
   :class:`Product` is opened and are not automatically updated when the
   :meth:`epr.Field.set_elem` and :meth:`epr.Field.set_elems` methods are
   called.
   In particular :class:`epr.Band`\ s contents may depend on several
   :class:`epr.Field` values, e.g. the contents of `Scaling_Factor_GADS`
   :class:`epr.Dataset`.
   For this reason the user may need to close and re-open the
   :class:`epr.Product` in order to have all changes effectively applied.

   .. seealso:: :doc:`update_example`

   .. index::
      pair: scaling; factor


.. _`special method`: https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html
.. _pythonic: http://www.cafepy.com/article/be_pythonic
.. _`context manager`: https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#context-manager-types
